The fox that rode a camel

There once was a fox who lived near a garden. Many a day, he would slink through a hole in the garden wall, and eat his fill of the delicious fruit that grew there. Juicy persimmons, tasty peaches, and delectable tangerines, he would eat them all, before trying to catch a chicken or two.

So went the days for the fox, until one morning the gardener caught sight of him, and chased him around the garden with a broomstick. The fox tried to jump through the hole in the wall, but discovered too late that the gardener had patched the hole with fresh mud plaster, so he could not escape.fox

Seeing the gardener approaching while waving a big stick, and knowing that he had no way of escape, the fox decided to simply play dead. He dropped to the ground, rolled over onto his back, and shut his eyes tight.

When the gardener reached the fox, he saw him just lying on the ground as if dead. The gardener poked at the fox a few times with his stick, but the fox would not move. Assuming that the fox had died of fright, the gardener picked him up and tossed him out of the garden.

Days passed, and the fox was not able to find another way back into the garden. With each day, he grew hungrier and hungier, so he hatched another plan. He decided to visit a lion he knew that lived in a nearby forest, in the hopes of eating some leftover scraps from the lion’s table. He walked and walked until he reached the lion’s den in a cave near the forest.

The fox sat near the entrance of the den and yelled out, “Hello lion! It is the fox here to pay you a visit, my old friend!”

“Hello fox, what brings you here and how have you been?”, the lion roared as he came out of his den to greet the fox.

“I decided to walk all the way over here just to visit you. After all, what are friends for, if they can’t visit their friends once in a while,” said the fox, “but don’t ask me how I am doing, for I carry many burdens and much sadness today.”

“Why, fox, what has happened?” asked the lion, only slightly concerned.

“The truth is that I haven’t eaten in days, and my belly is empty because I was not able to find any food on the way over here”, replied the fox. “Do you have anything to eat, for I have traveled a great distance to see you, and I am very hungry!”

“I am ashamed to say that I have no food for you, fox, for though I recently caught a fat boar, I’m afraid I ate him all up and have nothing left to share with you,” said the lion. “However, if you can wait a bit longer, I’ll see what I can hunt in the forest tomorrow.”

The fox, who was too hungry to wait another day, thanked the lion and said, “My dear lion, I don’t wish to cause you any trouble. I happen to know of a stupid and dull camel that works in a grain mill nearby. Perhaps I can trick him into coming here, so we can both eat well!”

The lion agreed with the fox’s plan, and said that he would lay in wait for the camel to approach.

All the fox had to do now was to go see the camel and somehow convince him to come near the lion’s den. So the fox went to a neighboring village, where indeed a camel worked at a grain mill. The camel spent days going around and around in circles, moving the millstone which was used to grind wheat and oat into flour.

As he worked, the camel saw the fox approaching and said, “Hello fox, what brings you here?”

“Hello camel! I am happy to see you,” said the fox, cheerfully. “I have come a long way just to visit you, old friend, for what are friends for if they don’t visit eachother once in a while?”

The camel thanked the fox for coming, and asked, “How have you been?”

“I have never been happier, camel, for I am on my way to a secret land I recently discovered, where the grass is always green, where is plenty to eat, and there’s no need to work.” Then, feigning concern, the fox lowered his voice and asked, “Tell me camel, why do you spend your days going around in circles? Is this how you plan on wasting away your life away?”

The camel thought for moment, and replied, “I have to work to earn my keep. I turn this millstone every day from dawn ’til dusk, and in the evenings, the miller gives me some food and a safe place to sleep. True, this is hard work, but I am content.”

The fox pretended to go into deep thought as he absentmindedly flicked and fluffed his tail for a while, and then he excitedly said, “But I have an idea! Why don’t you come with me to my secret land? I can use the company, and there you will never have to grind a millstone ever again, my dearest friend!” 

The camel stood still and thought this over for a while, and then agreed to accompany the fox. The fox chewed through the camel’s yole, and freed him from the millstone. Then he said to the camel, “My dear friend, as you know I have been walking for a long time to reach this place . Do you mind if I ride your back as I guide you to my secret land?”

The camel agreed to this, being an agreeable sort of camel, and the fox jumped onto the camel’s back as the two headed towards the forest. All the while the fox whispered many lies about the secret land that he had supposedly discovered into the camel’s ear, hoping to keep the camel distracted.

The camel walked and walked until they approached the lion’s den. At that moment, the camel caught sight of the lion hiding in the bushes, and discovered the trap that was laid for him. “Oh, how can I go to my doom with my own four feet!” the camel reproached himself. “I must find a way out of this trap before it is too late!” So he immediately turned around and started walking back to the mill.

The confused fox asked, “Why have you turned back now, camel?”

“Oh, my goodness! I have forgotten something very important, and I must fetch it immediately, for I cannot go anywhere without it!” cried the camel.

Frustrated, the fox yelled, “What! What have you forgotten which is so important?!”

“A book of advice that my father left me. I must sleep with it under my pillow every night, or else I have bad dreams,” the camel replied, as he increased his pace to get away from the hiding lion as quickly as possible.

The fox saw that he was powerless to stop the camel, so he decided to play along, and try to convince the camel to return to the spot the following day. “No matter. We will fetch your book, camel, and then we can come back tomorrow.  But tell me, what advice did your father write down in this book which is so important?”

The camel, who was growing breathless, replied, “There were five. The first one was ‘Never go anywhere without this book of advice’, but I have forgotten the remaining four. I’ll remember them as soon as I get back to the mill.”

And as soon as the camel reached the safety of the mill, he sighed in relief and said to the fox, “Ah! Now I remember the other advice that my father gave me. The second was ‘There’s no shame in honest work.’ The third was, ‘Be thankful for what you have.’  The fourth was ‘Never be friends with tricksters, for in the end they will trick you too.’ But the fifth and most important thing my father told me was… ‘Don’t go close to lions!’ ”

And having said that, the camel shook the fox off of his back, and returned to his millstone.